Add doc for table_changes function (#17252)
trinodb/trino: docs/src/main/sphinx/connector/delta-lake.rst

* ``$file_size``
    Size of the file for this row.

Table functions
---------------

The connector provides the following table functions:

table_changes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Allows reading Change Data Feed (CDF) entries to expose row-level changes
between two versions of a Delta Lake table.

> When the ``change_data_feed_enabled`` table property is set to ``true``

Reviewer: Wrap up

on a specific Delta Lake table, the connector records change events for
all data changes on the table. In addition to columns present in the table
the function returns the following values for each change event:

* ``_change_type``

>     Gives the type of change that occurred as represented as ``VARCHAR`` value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Gives the type of change that occurred.
```

and wrap

    Possible values are ``insert``, ``delete``, ``update_preimage`` and ``update_postimage``.

* ``_commit_version``

>     Shows the table version for which the change occurred as ``BIGINT`` value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Shows the table version for which the change occurred.
```

* ``_commit_timestamp``

>     Represents the timestamp for the commit in which the specified change happened as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Represents the timestamp for the commit in which the specified change happened.
```

>     ``TIMESTAMP(3) WITH TIME ZONE`` data type value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   
```

.. code-block:: sql

    SELECT
      *
    FROM
      TABLE(
        system.table_changes(
          schema_name => 'test_schema',
          table_name => 'tableName',
          since_version => 0
        )
      );

> ``schema_name`` - type ``VARCHAR``, required, name of the schema for which the function will be called

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``schema_name`` - type ``VARCHAR``, required, name of the schema for which the function is called
```

> ``table_name`` - type ``VARCHAR``, required, name of the table for which the function will be called

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``table_name`` - type ``VARCHAR``, required, name of the table for which the function is called
```

> ``since_version`` - type ``BIGINT``, optional, version from which changes will be shown, exclusive

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``since_version`` - type ``BIGINT``, optional, version from which changes are shown, exclusive
```

Also what do ou mean by exclusive? If you mean that it work show that version itself we should maybe reword

Example:

Create table:

.. code-block:: sql

    CREATE TABLE pages (page_url VARCHAR, domain VARCHAR, views INTEGER)
        WITH (change_data_feed_enabled = true);

> Insert some data:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Insert data:
```

.. code-block:: sql

    INSERT INTO pages
        VALUES
            ('url1', 'domain1', 1),
            ('url2', 'domain2', 2),
            ('url3', 'domain1', 3);
    INSERT INTO pages
        VALUES
            ('url4', 'domain1', 400),
            ('url5', 'domain2', 500),
            ('url6', 'domain3', 2);

> Update some data:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Update data:
```

.. code-block:: sql

    UPDATE pages SET domain = 'domain4' WHERE views = 2;

Select changes:

.. code-block:: sql

    SELECT
      *
    FROM
      TABLE(
        system.table_changes(

>           schema_name => 'test_schema',

Reviewer: I think we need to add the schema to the queries above to be clear

Reviewer: Or add a "use" command first

  url5        |     domain2    |    500      |    insert           |     2                 |    2023-03-10T21:22:23.000+0000
  url6        |     domain3    |    2        |    insert           |     2                 |    2023-03-10T21:22:23.000+0000
  url2        |     domain2    |    2        |    update_preimage  |     3                 |    2023-03-10T22:23:24.000+0000
  url2        |     domain4    |    2        |    update_postimage |     3                 |    2023-03-10T22:23:24.000+0000
  url6        |     domain3    |    2        |    update_preimage  |     3                 |    2023-03-10T22:23:24.000+0000
  url6        |     domain4    |    2        |    update_postimage |     3                 |    2023-03-10T22:23:24.000+0000

The output shows what changes happen in which version.
For example in version 3 two rows were modified, first one changed from
``('url2', 'domain2', 2)`` into ``('url2', 'domain4', 2)`` and the second from
``('url6', 'domain2', 2)`` into ``('url6', 'domain4', 2)``.

If ``since_version`` is not provided the function produces change events
starting from when the table was created.

> Example, provided that there is exactly the same table as created above:

Reviewer: We can omit that .. its implied since we are still talking about the same example

.. code-block:: sql

    SELECT
      *
    FROM
      TABLE(
        system.table_changes(
          schema_name => 'test_schema',
          table_name => 'pages'
        )
      )
    ORDER BY _commit_version ASC;

> The preceding sequence of SQL statements returns the following result:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The preceding SQL statement returns the following result:
```

  url2        |     domain2    |    2        |    insert           |     1                 |    2023-03-10T20:21:22.000+0000
  url3        |     domain1    |    3        |    insert           |     1                 |    2023-03-10T20:21:22.000+0000
  url4        |     domain1    |    400      |    insert           |     2                 |    2023-03-10T21:22:23.000+0000
  url5        |     domain2    |    500      |    insert           |     2                 |    2023-03-10T21:22:23.000+0000
  url6        |     domain3    |    2        |    insert           |     2                 |    2023-03-10T21:22:23.000+0000
  url2        |     domain2    |    2        |    update_preimage  |     3                 |    2023-03-10T22:23:24.000+0000
  url2        |     domain4    |    2        |    update_postimage |     3                 |    2023-03-10T22:23:24.000+0000
  url6        |     domain3    |    2        |    update_preimage  |     3                 |    2023-03-10T22:23:24.000+0000
  url6        |     domain4    |    2        |    update_postimage |     3                 |    2023-03-10T22:23:24.000+0000

> Here we can see changes that occurred at version 1 - three inserts - they were

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can see changes that occurred at version 1 as- three inserts. They are
```

> not visible in the previous code snippet when since_version value was set to 1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
not visible in the previous statement when since_version value was set to 1.
```

* ``$file_size``
    Size of the file for this row.

Functions
---------

> The connector exposes the following table functions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The connector provides the following table functions:
```

> system.table_changes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
table_changes
```

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Allows reading Change Data Feed (CDF) entries to

Reviewer: Wrapping is still weird for this paragraph .. 80 char would be ideal

expose row-level changes between two versions of a Delta Lake table.
When the ``change_data_feed_enabled`` table property is set to ``true``
on a specific Delta Lake table, the connector records change events for
all data changes on the table.

> In addition to columns present in the table this function

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to columns present in the table
```

the function returns the following values for each change event:

* ``_change_type``

>     Type ``VARCHAR``, gives the type of change that occurred,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Gives the type of change that occurred as represented as ``VARCHAR`` value. 
```

Author: I will change it but tbh all three descriptions of these additional columns that you propose seems unnaturally long and weird to me. I tried to be as short and as precise as possible. https://docs.databricks.com/delta/delta-change-data-feed.html#what-is-the-schema-for-the-change-data-feed - this is how databricks describes them

>     can be one of the following:``insert``, ``delete``, ``update_preimage``, ``update_postimage``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Possible values are ``insert``, ``delete``, ``update_preimage``, and ``update_postimage``.
```

* ``_commit_version``
    Type ``BIGINT``, shows the table version for which

>     the change occurred

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

* ``_commit_timestamp``
    Type ``TIMESTAMP(3) WITH TIME ZONE``,

>     shows the timestamp of the commit in which the specified change happened

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Represents the timestamp for the commit in which the specified change happened as 
    ``TIMESTAMP(3) WITH TIME ZONE`` data type value.
```

.. code-block:: sql

    SELECT
      *
    FROM
      TABLE(
        system.table_changes(
          schema_name => 'test_schema',
          table_name => 'tableName',
          since_version => 0
        )
      );

``since_version`` - type ``BIGINT``, optional, version from which changes will be shown, exclusive

Example:

Create table:

.. code-block:: sql

    CREATE TABLE pages (page_url VARCHAR, domain VARCHAR, views INTEGER)
        WITH (change_data_feed_enabled = true);

Insert some data:

.. code-block:: sql

>     INSERT INTO pages VALUES

Reviewer: I think we should at least move values down into a separate line

        ('url1', 'domain1', 1),
        ('url2', 'domain2', 2),
        ('url3', 'domain1', 3);
    INSERT INTO pages VALUES
        ('url4', 'domain1', 400),
        ('url5', 'domain2', 500),
        ('url6', 'domain3', 2);

Update some data:

.. code-block:: sql

>     UPDATE pages SET domain = 'domain4' WHERE views = 2;

Reviewer: three lines

Author: sorry i don't get this comment :|

Reviewer: ```
 UPDATE pages 
   SET domain = 'domain4' 
   WHERE views = 2;
```

          table_name => 'pages',
          since_version => 1
        )
      )
    ORDER BY _commit_version ASC;

The preceding sequence of SQL statements returns the following result:

.. code-block:: text

  page_url    |     domain     |    views    |    _change_type     |    _commit_version    |    _commit_timestamp
  url4        |     domain1    |    400      |    insert           |     2                 |    2023-03-10T21:22:23.000+0000
  url5        |     domain2    |    500      |    insert           |     2                 |    2023-03-10T21:22:23.000+0000
  url6        |     domain3    |    2        |    insert           |     2                 |    2023-03-10T21:22:23.000+0000
  url2        |     domain2    |    2        |    update_preimage  |     3                 |    2023-03-10T22:23:24.000+0000
  url2        |     domain4    |    2        |    update_postimage |     3                 |    2023-03-10T22:23:24.000+0000
  url6        |     domain3    |    2        |    update_preimage  |     3                 |    2023-03-10T22:23:24.000+0000
  url6        |     domain4    |    2        |    update_postimage |     3                 |    2023-03-10T22:23:24.000+0000

> In the output it can be easily seen what changes happen in which version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The output shows what changes happen in which version.
```

For example in version 3 two rows were modified, first one changed from
``('url2', 'domain2', 2)`` into ``('url2', 'domain4', 2)`` and the second from
``('url6', 'domain2', 2)`` into ``('url6', 'domain4', 2)``.

If ``since_version`` is not provided the function produces change events
starting from when the table was created.

> Example:

Reviewer: From 833 to 861 .. this is all the same as above right. .. if so .. just omit it all

The connector supports :doc:`/admin/fault-tolerant-execution` of query
processing. Read and write operations are both supported with any retry policy.

Table functions
---------------

The connector provides the following table functions:

table_changes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Allows reading Change Data Feed (CDF) entries to expose row-level changes
between two versions of a Delta Lake table. When the ``change_data_feed_enabled``
table property is set to ``true`` on a specific Delta Lake table,
the connector records change events for all data changes on the table.

> In addition to columns present in the table the function returns the following

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In addition to returning the columns present in the table, the function
returns the following
```

Reviewer: Please apply this suggestion @homar

values for each change event:

* ``_change_type``
    Gives the type of change that occurred. Possible values are ``insert``,
    ``delete``, ``update_preimage`` and ``update_postimage``.

* ``_commit_version``
    Shows the table version for which the change occurred.

* ``_commit_timestamp``
    Represents the timestamp for the commit in which the specified change happened.

> .. code-block:: sql

Reviewer: This shows how to run the table function.. and I think it should therefore be explained before preceding info that explains the returned data

We also need a entry sentence before the query

    SELECT
      *
    FROM
      TABLE(
        system.table_changes(
          schema_name => 'test_schema',
          table_name => 'tableName',
          since_version => 0
        )
      );

``schema_name`` - type ``VARCHAR``, required, name of the schema for which the function is called

``table_name`` - type ``VARCHAR``, required, name of the table for which the function is called

``since_version`` - type ``BIGINT``, optional, version from which changes are shown, exclusive

> Example:

Reviewer: Expand this to a sentence.

  url2        |     domain2    |    2        |    insert           |     1                 |    2023-03-10T20:21:22.000+0000
  url3        |     domain1    |    3        |    insert           |     1                 |    2023-03-10T20:21:22.000+0000
  url4        |     domain1    |    400      |    insert           |     2                 |    2023-03-10T21:22:23.000+0000
  url5        |     domain2    |    500      |    insert           |     2                 |    2023-03-10T21:22:23.000+0000
  url6        |     domain3    |    2        |    insert           |     2                 |    2023-03-10T21:22:23.000+0000
  url2        |     domain2    |    2        |    update_preimage  |     3                 |    2023-03-10T22:23:24.000+0000
  url2        |     domain4    |    2        |    update_postimage |     3                 |    2023-03-10T22:23:24.000+0000
  url6        |     domain3    |    2        |    update_preimage  |     3                 |    2023-03-10T22:23:24.000+0000
  url6        |     domain4    |    2        |    update_postimage |     3                 |    2023-03-10T22:23:24.000+0000

> You can see changes that occurred at version 1 as- three inserts. They are

Reviewer: as- ??

> not visible in the previous statement when since_version value was set to 1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
not visible in the previous statement when ``since_version`` value was set to 1.
```
